                <!-- TO BE ADDED LATER WITH PICTURES! 
This is a cold-process soap making base recipe only. The step-by-step instructions of individual projects may vary. Before you begin, assemble your ingredients. If needed, prepare safety gear such as goggles, gloves, and long sleeves. Cover your work surface with newspaper.
     Important Safety note: Always add the sodium hydroxide (lye) to the water. NOT the
water to the sodium hydroxide. A violent reaction occurs and you could sustain chemical
burns if you do not observe this precaution.
    1. First, weigh the lye in a heatproof container. Weigh water in a separate container. (Note: A lye calculator is handy here: simply enter the oil weight or percentage, and the tool will provide the lye and liquid amount needed for the recipe.)
    2. Next, carefully pour the lye into the water, stirring gently with a heatproof utensil until the lye has fully dissolved. Set aside, and let cool for up to an hour.
    3. While the lye solution is cooling, weigh oils or solid butters. Melt with a double-boiler until up to 100 degrees.
    4. Pour the lye solution into the container of oils. Stir until trace is reached. (Trace refers to the point when the oils and lye solution have emulsified. At this stage, there should be no streaks of oil, and the soap will have the consistency of batter.) Then add any extra ingredients—such as natural exfoliants or colorants—stirring to combine.
    5. Carefully pour the melted soap into the mold. (The soap is still caustic at this stage, so keep your safety gear on when handling.) Cover the mold with a sheet of paper. To retain heat, wrap a towel around it. Set aside for up to two days or until completely cool and solid.
    6. When ready, remove homemade soap from the mold and slice it into bars. After it's removed from the mold, cold process soap can be cut by using a knife or a corrugated soap cutter available at soap suppliers. 
    7. Cure it for a month. Let the bar soaps cure in the open air for at least four weeks before using. It's done so the saponification process finishes fully and soap no longer is caustic to skin - it's not safe to use on skin until this step is finished! -->

                <!-- TO BE ADDED LATER WITH PICTURES! 
This method is the crock pot version of hot process soap making.         
    1. Weigh and combine oils in slow cooker. Measure out any botanicals or colorants you will be using along with essential oils, extracts and/or exfoliants really accuratelly and put them into containers so they are within reach.
    2. Mix lye into water and allow to cool. Before using sodium hydroxide, put on your safety equipment; goggles, gloves and long sleeve clothing as it is caustic and can do a lot of harm if not handled properly. Measure out the lye and pour it slowly into the container stirring as you pour.
Keep stirring until the lye crystals are completely dissolved. You will notice fumes and HEAT being produced while you are mixing the lye solution. Avoid breathing in the fumes.
    3. Add lye-water to oils and mix until tracing starts. If any solid oils/fats are used, melt them first by placing them into a crockpot on low heat or in a microvawe. Once the solid oils have melted, add the liquid oils. Make sure oils and lye solution are below 120°F (49°C).
   Combine lye solution and oil mixture by slowly pouring a thin stream of the lye solution into the pot of oils while using the whisk or stick blender to stir the mixture. Maintain a steady, strong stirring motion and Make sure to stir thoroughly all areas of the pot. The mixture will turn creamy and
opaque and then will begin to thicken.
    4. After reaching full trace cook the soap. Once the soap reaches a full trace, it's time to cook the mixture for about an hour and force the gel. The soap will heat up and start to bubble around the edges of the crock pot, keep an eye on the soap and stir it down gently only if it starts to bubble over.
    Once soap mixture starts looking a lot like Vaseline it is almost done, but to be fully sure it's recommended to check it with a pH test (it should register between pH 7-10 to be safe). If it passes the test - at this point the soap is safe to touch and use.
    5. Add Additives such as botanicals, colourants, fragrance/essential oils and exfoliants. If you want to make a swirl of colour or make coloured layers, divide off some soap and colour it now.
    Make sure to cool the soap to a temperature below the essential oils flash point. Flash point is the temperature that the essential oil will ignite and vaporize. If it is added at too high a temperature, your soap may not smell like you planned.
    You will have to work fast while mixing since the soap will cool quickly. Make sure that the additives are not cold.
    6. Scoop into mold and cool. Because the end product is a thick gooey mass (a lot like mashed potatoes) it must be scooped into
the mold quickly. Make sure to gently tap the mold on the counter to get out any air pockets. Now you have to just leave it alone! It can take 24 hours or sometimes more to cool the soap mixture down and harden enough to be able to remove it from the mold.
    7. Cutting and curing. After removing the soap from the mold, it's time to cut it. You can use a knife or a corrugated soap cutter available at soap suppliers. Once you have cut the soap into bars, they can either be used immediately or be cured for a few weeks. The longer the cure, the
harder and milder the soap will be.
-->


<!-- MELT & POUR. The easiest way to make soap as this doesn't involve handling lye. 
1. Prepare Your Supplies and Sanitize Your Work Space. Wash and dry molds, spatula, and plastic/glass containers with warm soapy water and dry completely. Sanitize your work area by spraying it with rubbing alcohol or a 5% bleach solution and then wipe dry with a clean paper towel
2. Measure Fragrance Oil Amount. You want to have your fragrance prepared ahead of time so the soap does not start to harden as you work. It is important to only use glass as fragrances can damage certain types of plastic and paper if it sits for long periods of time.
3.  Prepare Your Soap Base. Remove the soap base of your choice from packaging and cut the soap base into small, even-sized cubes. You can choose from many read-made soap bases with different ingredients and qualities. Depending on the end result you can choose opaque or transparent soap bases.
4. Melt Soap Base. You can choose to melt your soap mixture on a low-heated hob or in a microwave (usually the quickest way which only takes about 1 minute). Take care to not overheat the soap - you should stop heating it as soon as all of the soap lumps melt but before it starts bubbling heavily.
5. Add Additives such as colourants and fragrance/essential oils or exfoliants into melted soap. You will need to be quick as the soap mixture starts cooling down and solidifying quickly and ideally should not be reheated again.
6. Pour Soap Base Into Molds and Allow To Cool Down. Pour slowly to minimize bubbles. Fill to the rim of the mold. Quickly spray the surface with rubbing alcohol to break up any bubbles that may have formed on the surface.
After this let the mixture cool down and within a couple hours it can be removed from the mold and can be used immediately. Melt and pour soaps do not need curing, but they require airtight packaging if you want to keep them in a good condition use later in the future.   -->